Good'day I'm Norman Wildberger in today's video
we are going to head off in a very important new
direction we've been talking a lot about natural
numbers number theory the arithmetic of natural
numbers but we need a bigger number theory because
we want to have negative numbers we want to have
integers we want to be able to do subtraction
uniformly not just addition and multiplication
so we've talked about this kind of goal of
trying to introduce integers before so in our
math foundations 12 video is called introducing
the integers we did have a look at essentially
the classical 19th century way of thinking about
how to introduce integers from natural numbers
in this video we want to look at things in a
quite a different direction and we're going to
be motivated by first of all our understanding of
multisets we now have a much broader appreciation
for the power of thinking about multisets as
a fundamental data Condor structure and the
other thing that we're going to be motivated by is
surprisingly modern physics 20th century physics
is a remarkable intellectual scientific endeavor
and it's revealed so many remarkable things about
the world surprising almost unbelievable things
but it also Orient's us in new directions with
respect to very fundamental kinds of things we're
going to draw upon some of the understanding that
the physicists have achieved okay so let me remind
you of the classical way that one might introduce
integers if we assume we already have natural
numbers so we have the natural numbers 1 2 3 4
5 and we might be interested in creating minus
1 minus 2 minus 30 we may have or may not if we
don't already have it we can introduce 0 along
the way here just as well so what we do is we
look at pairs of natural numbers and we used a
particular notation we set em with a little /n
and we read this as M less n it's sort of parallel
to M minus n but we're not really saying that but
it's just a an expression that we write down
so these are the basic kinds of objects that
are going to be our integers and so 3 less to for
example is going to end up playing the role of the
integer 1 and it turns out to be the same as the
expression 6 less 5 while two less three ends up
playing the role of minus 1 and that's the same as
say seven less eight so we talked about how to set
up an arithmetic with integers this way and it was
all well and good and it works and it's it's one
possible way of proceeding so in this approach
the integers are more complicated objects they
are built from natural numbers but in fact they
don't properly contain them anymore we're really
going from natural numbers over here to integers
over here they are a different kind of beast they
are things of this form rather than just things
of the form M or n so we want to revisit this we
want to give this a some additional thought ask
ourselves is there some other way of proceeding
so there is a very interesting other way and let
me remind you that our orientation now is that
natural numbers are really best encoded by what
we're calling net the primitive natural numbers
and they were built up from an M set or multi set
point of view essentially requiring only these
two fundamental ingredients the idea of nothing
represented by a blank and the idea of some some
essential something which was represented by
a stroke or a mark page these were the basic
ingredients and then we said all right we can
create natural numbers just by taking multisets
essentially multisets of strokes or marks with the
possibility of also having a multi set containing
nothing so we got things like this the empty multi
set which ended up being called zero this multi
set with a single stroke which we could also
call the number one and then here is a multi
set with stroke and then another stroke or mark
mark that was ending up being called two and then
there was three and so on okay so that's that's
good and now we want to ask well now that we have
this multi said framework is it possible to use
that to build up a better more natural theory
of negative numbers we are going to look at 20th
century physics for inspiration so 20th century
physics is a very interesting subject of course
starting off with Einstein's beautiful theories
relativity special in general then moving on to
this remarkable business of quantum mechanics it's
remarkable but very mysterious business of quantum
mechanics and then this sort of gradually more and
more complicated view of the world in which we
live in involving all kinds of remarkable things
that happen at very small scales in the very large
scales okay so we're not going to deal very much
with this but we have talked a little bit about
the part of that story that's relevant for us in
math foundations 186 when we were talking about
the concept of nothing and how that concept is
somehow reflected in 20th century physicists
view of the vacuum the vacuum or sort of empty
space is the physical equivalent of nothing or
at least close approximation to it but we saw
that in fact the vacuum was two physicists much
more complicated than it might appear from the
outside now very interesting part of the story is
that in around 1928 the Great British physicist
Paul Dirac predicted a rather remarkable new kind
of particle called a positron and so the positron
was much like an electron and had the same kind of
mass and a lot of the same properties except that
it has a positive charge rather than a negative
charge and a few years later see Anderson actually
found evidence for positron since then this
idea of particles having antiparticles is now
a main feature of 20th century understanding of
elementary particles and it's a bit of a mystery
because these antiparticles are not so easy to
find in general often they don't live very long
it seems as if nature is quite lopsided there's a
lot of more particles than there are antiparticles
but nevertheless we do understand that there's
quite a long list of pairings between say like
a particle of an electron and the associated
positron or a neutron the antineutron or a
proton or an antiproton this kind of symmetry even
extends down to the level of quarks so for example
if we have up charm and top these are quarks
some kind of very elementary kinds of particles
then they supposedly have anti quarks which are
usually denoted with bars so you Bar C bar T bar
and the main feature about these things is that
generally the particles and their antiparticles
have similar properties but they have opposite
charges the idea is that if you bring a particle
and its antiparticle together then they poof
annihilate each other so for example if you
have an electron and a positive draw and you shoot
them towards each other then poof they will kind
of annihilate each other but there will be some
energy resulting as represented by two photons
that spin out from the collision so in some sense
they sort of cancel each other out but there is
some kind of residue and even more curious kind
of fun all is this idea of particle antiparticle
creation that essentially can happen even in a
vacuum so if we have some empty space then this
empty space according to a physicist it still has
some kind of residual energy so it's not entirely
empty it's not entirely you know blank because if
it did then that would contradict the uncertainty
principle which basically tells us that we can't
know everything about a particular situation so
in particular we can't know that something is
completely empty with absolutely zero energy
so in this vacuum kind of situation where you
have this vacuum and maybe have some underlying
energy what can happen is that spontaneously an
electron and positron can sort of appear and they
are there for a very short period of time some
very small fraction a second and then shortly
afterwards they kind of cancel each other out and
we're back to the empty space before so this kind
of creation of this particle antiparticle pair
they're usually calls with virtual things because
they don't actually live very long it's very
difficult to actually take them and use them
for something but this this kind of creation is
thought to be happening all the time in a vacuum
the vacuum is really a seething sea of possible
creations and annihilations of all these little
pairs of particles mantic particles so that's
why the physicist thinks of a vacuum is a highly
non-trivial kind of thing containing all these
very remarkable to us virtual kinds of creations
and on violations it's a very remarkable story so
I would like to propose a bold new idea the idea
is that we should augment our list of fundamental
building blocks of the mathematical world by not
just having a unit something represented by a
mark on the page but we should also include an
anti something which we can denote by a mark on
the page with a little bar over it the same kind
of bar that the physicists use to denote their
antiparticles so there's a mark the fundamental
ingredient that sits inside our multisets to
create natural numbers and now we're positing
the idea that maybe we can include in this story
the idea of an anti mark so if a mark or stroke or
unit something appears in a multi set with a anti
mark or anti stroke or aunty something whatever
you like to call it then we're going to agree
that they cancel out to give us nothing so this
is the basic defining equation that tells us how
our basic something and our basic anti something
interact if you have something right beside aunty
something then poof they give you nothing now
notice that there's no zero on this side we're not
saying that you get zero we're saying that you get
nothing so this is this new role of nothing that
I've introduced some videos back where we think
about an empty piece of the page is actually
being a legitimate mathematical notion in some
sense what we're doing if you like to think about
it this way is going back before the hindu-arabic
system of numerals where we have 0 is representing
apps of tens or hundreds or something in a digit
expansion we're going back to the Babylonians
really in the Babylonian sexagesimal system
they had little marks representing tens and
little marks representing ones that they are
open if their little stylus is on clay tablets
and if there were no tens around they just left
a blank there so they definitely used empty space
on their page on their clay tablets to represent
the absence of something and what we're doing here
is we're going back to that very ancient tradition
of recognizing the importance of nothing the
importance of allowing ourselves the possibility
of writing a meaningful empty space so you know
up till this year you would look an equation
like this and say well this doesn't mean a thing
there's something wrong with this equation I'm
saying this is a very interesting equation that
actually represents a key fact you put a mark
and an anti mark together and you get nothing
it's a paradigm shift really in terms of how
we're going to understand arithmetic so here are
some examples so we now have the idea of having
a multiset which might contain not only marks but
also anti marks up till now in our foundations of
arithmetic we are only considering multisets that
had marks in them that's how we build up our basic
natural number system now we're extending the
possibilities a little bit so we have a multiset
say containing mark mark mark anti mark and by our
agreement this aunty mark will cancel with one of
those other marks to give us just mark mark now
it doesn't make sense to really ask well which of
these is it canceling with it cancels with one of
them because this is not ordered the order doesn't
matter these various marks are indistinguishable
they really are repeats the same basic thing so it
doesn't really matter which one of these is
being canceled it's just the case that this
cancels with one of those and we end up just with
a couple of marks similarly if we have mark anti
mark mark aunty mark well then we get a little bit
more cancellation and we end up with our empty em
set if we have mark mark mark mark mark anti mark
and Mark then we end up with mark mark mark if we
have an to mark an Tamar can t marke marke then we
have equivalent msn aunty mark and Mark ok so now
some key definitions what is the negative number
a negative number is an M set of anti marks it's
an M set of anti marks this is a negative number
it consists of just anti marks what is an integer
an integer is an M set of marks or an amp set of
AIT marks so we allow either the possibility that
we have an M set of marks or the possibility that
we have an M set of anti marks if we have either
of those two then we say that we have an integer
this is an integer this is an integer this is an
integer this is an integer these are all integers
on this side and we're going to introduce two new
types we reduce the type neg for- the type of a
negative number and int for integer the type of an
integer all right so here are some more examples
here is a natural number its mark mark mark mark
mark that M set here is a negative number aunty
mark aunty mark and ER can t mark it's an msata
aunty marks that's a negative number belongs
to neg this is a national number it belongs to
and that both of them are integers so both of
them are integers this is also an integer this
is also an integer it's possible for something to
have different types it's possible for this to be
a negative number as well as being an integer no
problem this is the mtm set it's a natural number
it's usually what we call zero here is the same
empty em set it's also a negative number because
it's an M set of anti marks we didn't say that the
M senator of auntie marks had to be non-empty okay
m set of auntie marks can include the possibility
of having an M set that's empty so that is both a
negative number as well as a natural number
what about this thing mark mark mark auntie
mark and Mark is this an M set of marks well the
way it's looking now it's not an M said mark space
has both marks and auntie marks and it's also not
an M set of anti marks now you can say well this
evaluates by the basic fundamental property of
auntie marks and Mars together it evaluates to
this thing which is a natural number and that's
fair enough but I'd like to say that this thing
here is actually a integer expression it's
something that evaluates to an integer but
is not actually formally on integer itself it's a
little bit like the difference between the number
5 which is a numeral it's a hindu-arabic numeral
or numb and the expression 2 plus 3 expression
2 plus 3 evaluates to five but it's actually
formally something a little bit different okay
so we get this idea now that the type of integer
includes both the type of nat and type of name
and we can use this sort of set theoretic Union
here so we can refer to this as being the union
of these two types doesn't mean that we're taking
unions of infinite sets we're definitely not doing
that we're taking the union of types so something
is a type integer means that it's either of type
this or sometimes this and the or can include
the possibility that the object is something of
type of both game 20 similarly Nats intersect neg
this is also a type that's perhaps useful for us
to give a name to let's call it zero it's a type
it's a very limited kind of type there's only one
object that has that type namely our empty em set
but nevertheless it captures the idea that we have
two overlapping types overlapping in exactly
the 0 am set so I want to emphasize that I'm
interested in having complete symmetry between
natural numbers and negative numbers maybe from
your point of view natural numbers over here and
negative numbers over here candid just overlapping
at 0 but I want there to be complete symmetry
between them fair enough ok so this is the
start of a new kind of arithmetic start of integer
arithmetic of course just the beginning because we
just identified what the fundamental objects are
we still have to a define the operations and be
proved the laws of arithmetic but we're always
obligated to do when we're setting up a number
system correctly ok but very exciting because
it really is a new direction for arithmetic
and it's firmly rooted in our understanding of
em sets and this sort of fundamental expansion
now having three fundamental ideas or concepts
at the root of everything nothing something and
aunty something next time we're going to explore
more of the consequences of this new paradigm
shift for arithmetic I hope you'll join me for
that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening